<<<Bernice>>> 

Commented that the ant species total of 12,000 was likely an
underestimate given that antweb reports 16000+ with sub-species.

<<<Nick See Overleaf>>>

<<<Nate>>>

Hey Matt - Thanks for pulling this together. 

I’ve added a few comments and queries on the PDF. 

I had a comment similar to Rob’s. I guess I didn’t understand the
climatic correlations either. Did you use all of the ants for which
genomes exist? Or just Aphaenogaster? It reads like you did both.

The R2 and stress of the final solutions were 0.80 and 15% for all
genomes together and 0.88 and 5% for the Aphaenogaster genomes
alone. ...  We observed significant biogeographic patterns of genomic
composition. The top correlations were primarily to temperature range
(MDR, ATR, Iso), precipitation (PCQ, PDM, PWM) and minimum temperature
(Tmin) (Table 4). One specific pattern, is that Mean Diurnal Range
(MDR), the mean difference between the min and max monthly
temperature, was positively correlated with the separation of the
genus Aphaenogaster from other species (Fig 5).

And I don’t really understand Figure 5, I have to admit. That’s just
an NMDS plot of genome distance, correct? And it shows that
Aphaenogaster spp. Tend to cluster? But climatic variables (that are
not easy to interpret, generally) are also on the graph?

And how did you get the climate data for the genomes of the other
species? From where they were collected? Or something like the
centroid of the ranges? Or what?

Anyways, thanks again for this. I appreciate being included, and
especially appreciate the shout-out to GAGA! Mind if I share this
draft with them?

Nate


<<<Rob>>>

Hi Matt,

Sorry for the delay. Here are some edits. I think this is great, but
you can sell it more. The way you have framed it it has three
pieces...

1) Bunch of cool genomes, eat your heart out and explore.
2) A test of whether genome size correlates with latitude/climate.
3) A test of whether genome similarity is predicted by climate. This
is just a really high powered way of testing whether species that live
in the same conditions tend to be closely related (right?). Say as
much. Probably if Nick and Aaron think about the null model much for
this their heads will go crooked, but they'll be OK.

If this is right, make sure to set this up in the intro....

a) Ants are cool and good to study
b) Aphaenogaster is especially cool and we think it has interesting
genomes
c) Because it is a genus in which life history doesn't vary much but
geography does, great chance to consider the effects of climate on
genome size. An effect was found before, for crustracea. We don't see
one here for apheanogaster, but that may be because genome size seems
very conserved in the genus. We don't/do see one however when we
consider all the ants.
d) Aphaenogaster from different regions have different thermal
tolerances, which are at least partially genetically encoded. We might
expected Aphaenogaster from the same region to also be more likely to
have more similar genomes than expected by chance.  This part sticks
me up though because I think that you expect neutral genes to show no
pattern (or the null) and functional genes to show a strong
pattern. Is that what is being tested?

Best,

Rob
