Dear Matthew,

Thank you for your submission to PeerJ.

It is my opinion as the Academic Editor for your article - Expanded
view of the ecological genomics of ant responses to climate change -
that it requires a number of Major Revisions.

My suggested changes and reviewer comments are shown below and on your
article 'Overview' screen.  If you address these changes and resubmit,
there's a good chance your article will be accepted (although this
isn't guaranteed).

Resubmission
1. Download your resubmission checklist to begin
1. Download Resubmission Checklist
2. And when you're ready
2. Edit and Resubmit your Article

Although not a hard deadline, we expect you to submit your revision
within the next 55 days.

With kind regards,

Nigel Andrew
Academic Editor, PeerJ
Editor's Comments

MAJOR REVISIONS

All three reviewers have provided substantive and insightful
comments. Please assess and review accordingly. Address each point
from each of the three reviewers in your rebuttal.

Reviewer 1 (Anonymous)
Basic reporting

The article is generally well prepared, though see comments below
regarding climate variables and the abbreviations. Figure are
generally crisp / easy to read (save vectors in Figure 6).

A few areas that require attention include:

(1) I think the manuscript could be improved through the addition of
more background / context regarding the relationship(s) between
climate adaptation, genome size, and response to climatic change.

Given the exploratory nature of the study, perhaps it is not possible
to develop predictions / testable hypotheses, but it was unclear to me
how / why relationships between genome size and climate gradients
would be indicative of ant responses to climate change. In think this
is especially important given that the authors were apparently not
able to control for phylogenetic relatedness (which they acknowledge
and discuss).

The title makes a link between 'ecological genomics' and 'responses to
climate change', but that's not really what this paper is
doing. Instead, the study involves correlating aspects of the genome
with climate variables, finding some significant relationships, and
then claiming that these relationships are somehow informative (or at
least warrant consideration) of climate change responses. However,
without a clear, mechanistic linkage between climate, genome size, and
climate adaptation, I could not follow how these biogeographical
relationships say anything about climate change responses.

I think it is enough to report these relationships and speculate some
in the Discussion as the what they might mean, but as written, I do
not feel the title reflects the study or its findings.

(2) At times the writing was vague and wandering, particularly in the
Introduction. A good example is L69-70, which states "...phylogenetics
is a factor determining the response of ant species to climatic
change...". It was unclear to this reader how / why "phylogenetics"
would "determine" a response to climatic change.

The Introduction also reads a bit like a laundry list of reasons
justifying what it is important to sequences the genomes of ants and
Aphaenogaster in particular. In my opinion, a lot of this wasted
space. I think it is enough to say ants are important generally,
Aphaenogaster is something the authors have studied and so have some
insights and get on with a discussion about genomics and climate
adaptation - either broadly or in ants specifically to the extent that
is possible.

(3) A few minor points: 

L168-170 - Check grammar / missing word.

Figure 1 - Not sure this one is necessary.

Figure 6 (vectors and associated labels need to be much darker to be visible). 

There is some minor confusion regarding which climate variables / datasets were used when. For example-

Table 2 - PRISM data are reported here, but worldclim is used in the analyses - any reason for different datasets? 

L178 - Annual minimum temperature and annual maximum temperature are
not among the 19 standard bioclim variables from WordClim - are these
custom or referring to BIO5/6 (which are month not annual)?

Experimental design

As mentioned above, I think the manuscript would benefit if
predictions or research questions were more clearly articulated and
supported in the Introduction. While two hypotheses are mentioned in
the final paragraph of the Introduction, they tended to be vague or
poorly worded.

For example: "...to test the hypothesis that climate variables shape
the distribution of ant genomes, we explored the correlation between
spatial and multi-decadal climate variables". First, what is the
distribution of an ant genome? And second, it reads as if the
correlation of interest is between "spatial and multi-decadal climate
variables" - in other words, between two kinds of climate variables,
not between a set of climate variables and some aspect of ant genomes.

Otherwise, the methods are well described and the statistical analyses
seem well executed.

Validity of the findings

I will echo my comments above regarding the failure to clearly
articulate the linkages between climate gradients, genome attributes
(size, similarity), and responses to climate change.

While the data seem robust (I cannot comment on the sequencing /
bioinformatics) and the analyses sound, and while the authors
acknowledge the importance of other factors ignored (for now) in the
analyses (such as phylogenetic correlations), I do feel that, given
the sample size, the data and results are somewhat limited in what
they can tell use about climate adaptation / responses in this group
of ants. It certainly is great to have and report these new sequences,
which will add to a growing body of sequence data for ants, I just
caution against over-interpretation / speculation given the small
sample size and uncertainty.

Reviewer 2 (Yannick Wurm)

Basic reporting
no comment

Experimental design
no comment

Validity of the findings
no comment

Comments for the Author

Title: Expanded view of the ecological genomics of ant responses to climate change

The authors have produced draft sequences for the genomes of six
species of ants in the genus Aphaenogaster collected from eastern
North America. There is high value in these ant genome sequences: ants
in this genus are models for studies of ecology and behavior (>300
papers with Aphaenogaster in the title), no sequence from this genus
had to date been reported, these six new genomes increase the number
of ants with sequenced genomes by ~25%.

The methods for genome sequencing and analysis are sound and the
writing style and quality are appropriate (see minor issues
below). The new ant genome sequences could represent a publication on
their own, even without much analysis. The authors perform superficial
comparisons of the genome sequences: showing higher similarities
between genomes of species in the same genus than between genuses, as
well distinct separation from genera compared with others previously
published ant genomes in the formicoid subfamily. Intriguingly, the
data also support the polyphyly of A. rudis as described in recent
literature, though this evidence is based on a sample size of
n=2. Together, these data would be sufficient for publicaiton in
peerj.

However, the manuscript is framed within the context of using ants as
indicator taxa for environmental disturbance and climatic
variation. Specifically, the authors suggest that ecological variables
should influence ant genomic signatures. They propose that (i) ants
found within similar ecological conditions should have more similar
genomes; and that (ii) genome size should similarly correspond to
biogeographic patterns. These hypotheses are original and would be
very interesting if proven (stronger datasets to test such hypotheses
may exist in mammals). Unfortunately, neither hypothesis is very well
substantiated and the supporting data is rather tenuous because the
authors (i) lack power (a small number of species for a relatively
high number of examined environmental variables) and (ii) do not
control for phylogeny. We note that additionally there is little
consideration of possible variation within species.

Furthermore, the title evokes responses to climate change - which
implicitly suggests temperature manipulation experiments - but this is
quite far from the paper.

This is somewhat frustrating given that the senior author has a strong
track record of rigorous work. Controlling for phylogeny/ would make
the climatic/biogeographical analysis much stronger, although we note
that 21 of the 25 ant species used come from the Americas thus
potentially creating a bias. A rigorous analysis of the proposed
hypotheses would likely require much additional data generation that
is likely beyond the scope of this paper.

We recommend that the authors: 

- Move the biogeographic/climatic analysis from results to
  discussion. And shorten it substantially in the main text (this
  could involve moving some aspects to supplementary).

- Make it clear that the manuscript mainly reports a powerful new
  phylogenomic resource for an important ant genus

- Change the title and abstract (and other parts) of the manuscript to
  focus on the resource and dramatically tone down interpretations
  linked to ecology or effects of climate change.

We expect that this would only represent a small amount of work. 

With kind regards,

Gino Brignoli & Yannick Wurm

Minor comments
L52 “...social structure and community assembly” - missing u
L89 “With the these new…” - remove “the”

L94: "demonstrated patterns in the evolutionary dynamics of ant genome
size (Tsutsui et al., 2008) " - I think the authors simply mean to say
that there was variation in genome size.
L113: Anophales -> Anopheles
L118 "blast" is lowercase - while subsequent page it is uppercase L128
L118: which version of BLAST? What was approach used to remove
contaminants, chimeric sequences etc (software, parameters etc)
L126: what does "70% of fragments mapped " mean? Fragments of what? Mapped from where to where?
L128: using -> Using
L128/129: which NCBI sequence database? NR? Which blast algorithm? Blastx? blastn?
L130: the -> The. similar capitalization issues in Fig 3 legend and elsewehre
L133: I don't understand what "recommended for gene coverage" means?
L123: "Genome Quality:" -> usually the CEGMA (or BUSCO) metrics are used as biological measures of genome completeness.
L189 to 191 - were all 26 ant species used for all analyses? If so
which collection locations were used for previously published genomes?
(Such information may unfortunately be absent from previously
published genomes)
Pg13 “Figure 6. Plot an showing…” - remove “an”
L249 “from from previous experimental…” 
Table 1 can be supplementary
Ref "The evolution of genome size in ants. " - should only have 4
authors but has about 20x more!
The two rudis colonies do not cluster together according to
whole-genome MASH. I understand the authors dont want to do fullgenome
comparisons here - however does e.g., a mitochondrial or nuclear
“housekeeping” gene phylogeny based on sequences from these sample
support the polyphyly?

Reviewer 3 (Anonymous)

Basic reporting
no comment

Experimental design

Major comments:

There are a few issues with the main analysis correlating
environmental variables with genomic characteristics:

1. The total length of assemblies is not a good metric for genome
size. While flow cytometry is ideal, k-mer analysis (e.g. GenomeScope)
also tends to be more accurate than assembly size so should be used
instead.
2. The authors note that they did not perform phylogenetic correction
for their analyses (line 237) but seem to acknowledge that it would be
a more appropriate approach. I would argue that such a correction is
essential. The conclusion that climate influences genomic
characteristics is completely dependent on this analysis.
3. It appears that the latitude and longitude of collecting site were
used for correlational analyses. However, given that this study is
comparative in nature, each individual genome is meant to represent an
entire species. And several of these species have very large ranges
that span the entire eastern United States into Canada making these
data points inappropriate for this analysis. The midpoint of the
species ranges could be a reasonable alternative. Unless the authors
are arguing that these six specimens that they have used are
effectively a single population but I don’t believe that this is the
case. While there appears to be some undiscovered species diversity
within A. rudis, the rest appear to be good species without gene flow
between them.
4. The previously sequenced ant genomes included in the analysis were
sequenced using a variety of different methods. For example, some
genomes included 454 sequencing. This could bias the size of the
genome assembled. Perhaps some of these influences could be taken into
account.
5. The authors perform their analyses both by including Aphaenogaster
genomes and again without these new genomes. However, a third analysis
that focuses just on Aphaenogaster might be more compelling. This
would eliminate some of the phylogenetic bias in the data and also
eliminates many of the other factors that could be playing a role as
all Aphaenogaster genomes were collected and assembled in the same
way. I also wonder if leaving out the fungus-growing ants, a group
that is also over-represented, could have a similar effect. Relatedly,
the fact that Aphaenogaster has such an impact on the analyses seems
to suggest that phylogeny is playing a significant role.

Other comments:

- More detail is needed for the DNA extraction procedure. Was it
  really necessary to collect DNA from a whole colony? Is there
  polygyny or multiple-mating in these species that could affect the
  assembly? Reporting heterozygosity/genetic diversity would be useful
  and these data could be used to infer colony structure if it is not
  already known.
- While genome annotation is certainly a significant additional
  challenge, comparing gene sets across species could provide
  additional insight. This can now be relatively easily accomplished
  with pipelines like BRAKER which don’t necessarily require
  transcript data to run.
- Line 128: That is not the average genome size of those listed in the
  table
- Line 128-130: Why was this BLAST analysis done?

Validity of the findings
no comment

Comments for the Author

This study by Lau and colleagues presents the newly sequenced genomes
of six species of ants in the genus Aphaenogaster. Given their
worldwide abundance and ecological importance, the genomes of these
species are likely to be of substantial scientific use. There are
relatively few taxonomic groups, particularly within ants, where
multiple closely related species have been de novo sequenced, making
this a potentially valuable resource for studying both ants and genome
evolution.
