L35 Both reviewers were clearly skeptical that this paper had anything
to do with climate change per se.  Climate adaptation, yes
(ultimately), because this adds the first temperate genomes to the
overall set of sequenced ant genomes.  But climate change, no.  Yet
the first two paragraphs are still entirely devoted to climate change.

The motivation for the study was climate change and the ultimate goal
is to predict responses of ants and ecosystems to climate change. I do
see that we can not make hard conclusions about climate change because
of the confoudned nature of the data. I will reduce the emphasis even
more than I have. 

L60 This shows genomes by country, not by climate zone or genera.

Ah, yes, I moved the figure reference.

L75 The relationship is not about variation per se (ie the variation
does not change across climates).  Particular characteristics might.
It would be better to move the genome /climate hypotheses up earlier
to lay out the basis for your analyses rather than back-loading them
after the objectives.

Move the hypotheses?

L77 This is just about climate, no genomes included in here.  Yet the
second sentence makes genomic predictions.  Unclear.

???

L81 The hypothesis is that patterns will exist?  That is very very
vague.  Is there no literature on climate effects on either of these
genomic characteristics at all?  Do genomes generally get smaller or
larger with temperature or some other env variable?  Would one really
expect convergence in genomic similarity on the basis of habitat?
Why?  This sounds like fishing for anything that comes out with no
biological basis for any prediction.  Reviewer 1 specifically asked
for background to justify these analyses.

???

L85 Doesn't this sentence confound phylogeny and climate?

???

L153 Reviewer 3 critiques total bp length as a measure of genome size,
and suggested something else (using GenomeScope) instead.  I see no
evidence you have done this.  Can you defend your decision to retain
this measure?

???

L158 The third reviewer critiqued your decision to use sampling
location info instead of some sort of range-wide center or range for
these species.  Can you defend the decision you have made?

???

L161 MASH similarity is a proxy for phylogeny.  Why not use it to
control for phylogeny and test effects on genome size in a
phylogenetically controlled way, as the reviewers want?  You don't
actually expect climate to directly affect genome similarity at the
sequence level, except in its covariance with phylogeny (ie clades
move across space in a biogeographically cohesive way).  Use it as a
predictor instead.  I suspect it will eliminate your environmental
effect, but that is the essence of the analytical problem here.  You
have added a bunch of highly phylogenetically correlated
samples. Presenting a weak, uncontrolled analysis in order to have
something significant to report is not really that helpful.

???

L189 The third reviewer suggested looking only at Aphaenogaster.  I do
not see that you have done so.

???

L210 You need to remove this stuff.  The reviewers did not buy it.

???

L212 This is a much more relevant frame.  You can speculate at the
very end that understanding climate adaptation at the genomic level
can provide insights for prospective changes under climate change, but
that's a step farther removed from where you are now.

??? 

L213 now you have returned to climate change, but you should be
focusing on climate adaptation across ants.  What is known about
climate adaptation in ants in extreme environments?  Variation in
freeze-tolerance?  What characteristics to the currently sequenced
species possess, and how are Aphaenogaster different?

???

L216 It is not strong, because it is confounded.

??? 

L222 Oh - why was this not in the introduction?  This is what your
reviewers were looking for - an a priori reason to expect genome size
might change in a particular way in response to these variables.

Move to intro?
